---
title: "Feasibility of real-time workflow segmentation for tracked needle interventions"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2014-06-01-IEEE-TBME_HUS+2014
excerpt: 'In this journal paper, we developed a workflow segmentation algorithm for needle interventions using needle spatial tracking data.'
date: 2014-06-01
venue: 'IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering (IEEE-TBME)'
paperurl: 'https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/6716990'
citation: 'M. S. Holden et al., (2014). "Feasibility of real-time workflow segmentation for tracked needle interventions"; in <i>IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering</i>, 61(6), pp. 1720-1728.'
---

Computer-assisted training systems promote both training efficacy and patient health. An important component for providing automatic feedback in computer-assisted training systems is workflow segmentation: the determination of what task in the workflow is being performed. Our objective was to develop a workflow segmentation algorithm for needle interventions using needle tracking data. Needle tracking data were collected from ultrasound-guided epidural injections and lumbar punctures, performed by medical personnel. The workflow segmentation algorithm was tested in a simulated real-time scenario: the algorithm was only allowed access to data recorded at, or prior to, the time being segmented. Segmentation output was compared to the ground-truth segmentations produced by independent blinded observers. Overall, the algorithm was 93% accurate. It automatically segmented the ultrasound-guided epidural procedures with 81% accuracy and the lumbar punctures with 82% accuracy. Given that the manual segmentation consistency was only 84%, the algorithm's accuracy was 93%. Using Cohen's d statistic, a medium effect size (0.5) was calculated. Because the algorithm segments needle-based procedures with such high accuracy, expert observers can be augmented by this algorithm without a large decrease in ability to follow trainees in a workflow. The proposed algorithm is feasible for use in a computer-assisted needle placement training system.

[Download paper here](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/6716990) [BibTeX](./../files/bibtex/HUS+2014.bib)