---
title: "Automatic segmentation of the carotid artery and internal jugular vein from 2D ultrasound images for 3D vascular reconstruction"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2020-08-24-IJCARS_GVV+2020
excerpt: 'In this journal paper, this work formulated and compares Mask R-CNN and U-Net-based algorithms to automatically segment the carotid artery (CA) and internal jugular vein (IJV) from transverse neck ultrasound (US), in the context of analyzing neck vascular morphology. This work was initially presented at IPCAI-2020.'
date: 2020-08-24
venue: 'International Journal of Computer Assisted Radiology and Surgery'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1007/s11548-020-02248-2'
citation: 'L.A. Groves et al., (2020). "Automatic segmentation of the carotid artery and internal jugular vein from 2D ultrasound images for 3D vascular reconstruction"; in <i>International Journal of Computer Assisted Radiology and Surgery</i>, (), pp.'
---

Purpose: In the context of analyzing neck vascular morphology, this work formulates and compares Mask R-CNN and U- Net-based algorithms to automatically segment the carotid artery (CA) and internal jugular vein (IJV) from transverse neck ultrasound (US). 

Methods: US scans of the neck vasculature were collected to produce a dataset of 2439 images and their respective manual segmentations. Fourfold cross-validation was employed to train and evaluate Mask RCNN and U-Net models. The U-Net algorithm includes a post-processing step that selects the largest connected segmentation for each class. AMaskR-CNN-based vascular reconstruction pipeline was validated by performing a surface-to-surface distance comparison between US and CT reconstructions from the same patient. 

Results: The average CA and IJV Dice scores produced by theMask R-CNN across the evaluation data from all four sets were for the CA and IJV, respectively. The reconstruction algorithm utilizing the Mask R-CNN was capable of producing accurate 0.90±0.08 and 0.88±0.14. The average Dice scores produced by the post-processed U-Net were 0.81±0.21 and 0.71±0.23, 3D reconstructions with majority of US reconstruction surface points being within 2mm of the CT equivalent. 

Conclusions: On average, the Mask R-CNN produced more accurate vascular segmentations compared to U-Net. The Mask R-CNN models were used to produce 3D reconstructed vasculature with a similar accuracy to that of a manually segmented CT scan. This implementation of the Mask R-CNN network enables automatic analysis of the neck vasculature and facilitates 3D vascular reconstruction.
Keywords

[Download paper here](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11548-020-02248-2) [BibTeX](./../files/bibtex/GVV+2020.bib)