---
title: "The effects of positioning on the volume/location of the internal jugular vein using 2-dimensional tracked ultrasound"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2020-04-01-JCVA_WLC+2020
excerpt: 'In this clinical journal paper, we investigated the effect of different position on the volume and location of the international jugular vein using tracked ultrasound.'
date: 2020-04-01
venue: 'Journal of Cardiothoracic and Vascular Anesthesia'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1053/j.jvca.2019.08.049'
citation: 'W. Wang et al., (2020). The effects of positioning on the volume/location of the internal jugular vein using 2-dimensional tracked ultrasound"; in <i>Journal of Cardiothoracic and Vascular Anesthesia</i>, 34(4), pp. 920-925.'
---

Objective: To investigate the effects of different positioning on the volume/location of the internal jugular vein (IJV) using 2-dimensional (2D) tracked ultrasound.

Design: This was a prospective, observational study.

Setting: Local research institute.

Participants: Healthy volunteers.

Interventions: Twenty healthy volunteers were scanned in the following 6 positions: (1) supine with head neutral, rotated 15 and 30 degrees to the left and (2) 5-, 10-, and 15-degree Trendelenburg position with head neutral. In each position the volunteer's neck was scanned using a 2D ultrasound probe tracked with a magnetic tracker. These spatially tracked 2D images were collected and reconstructed into a 3D volume of the IJV and carotid artery. This 3D ultrasound volume then was segmented to obtain a 3D surface on which measurements and calculations were performed.

Measurements and Main Results: The measurements included average cross-section area (CSA), CSA along the length of IJV, and average overlap rate. CSA (mm2) in the supine and 5-, 10-, and 15-degree Trendelenburg positions were as follows: 86.7 ± 44.8, 104.3 ± 54.5, 119.1 ± 58.6, and 133.7 ± 53.3 (p < 0.0001). CSA enlarged with the increase of Trendelenburg degree. Neither Trendelenburg position nor head rotation showed a correlation with overlap rate.

Conclusions: Trendelenburg position significantly increased the CSA of the IJV, thus facilitating IJV cannulation. This new 3D reconstruction method permits the creation of a 3D volume through a tracked 2D ultrasound scanning system with image acquisition and integration and may prove useful in providing the user with a “road map” of the vascular anatomy of a patient's neck or other anatomic structures.
This work was presented at the 60th Canadian Orthopaedics Association (COA) Annual Meeting.

[Download paper here](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.jvca.2019.08.049) [BibTeX](./../files/bibtex/WLC+2020.bib)